The most pernicious aspect of procrastination is that, we don't just put off our lives today; we put them off till our deathbed. Never forget: This very moment, we can change our lives. There never was a moment, and never will be, when we are without the power to alter our destiny. This second, we can turn the tables on Resistance. This second, we can sit down and do our work.  
 
Grandiose fantasies are a symptom of Resistance. They're the sign of an amateur. The professional has learned that success, like happiness, comes as a by-product of work. The professional concentrates on the work and allows rewards to come or not come, whatever they like. 
 
1) We show up every day. 
2) We show up no matter what. 
3) We stay on the job all day. We don't go home till the whistle blows. 
4) We are committed over the long haul.  
5) The stakes for us are high and real. This is about survival, feeding our families, educating our children. It's about eating. 
6) We accept remuneration for our labor. We're not here for fun. We work for money. 
7) We do not overidentify with our jobs. 
8) We master the technique of our jobs. 
9) We have a sense of humor about our jobs. 
10) We receive praise or blame in the real world. 
 
"You're where you wanted to be, aren't you? So you're taking a few blows. That's the price for being in the arena and not on the sidelines. Stop complaining and be grateful." That was when I realized I had become a pro. I had not yet 
had a success. But I had had a real failure.
 
The professional masters how, and leaves what and why to the gods.
 
The sign of the amateur is overglorification of and preoccupation with the mystery. The professional shuts up. She doesn't talk about it. She does her work. 
 
The professional knows that fear can never be overcome. 
 
He is prepared, each day, to confront his own self-sabotage. His goal is not victory (success will come by itself when it wants to) but to handle himself, his insides, as sturdily and steadily as he can. 
 
Editors are not the enemy; critics are not the enemy. Resistance is the enemy. The battle is inside our own heads.
 
The professional cannot allow the actions of others to define his reality. Tomorrow morning the critic will be gone, 
but the writer will still be there facing the blank page. Nothing matters but that he keeps working.
 
What I call Professionalism someone else might call the Artist's Code or the Warrior's Way. It's an attitude of  egolessness and service
 
We must do our work for its own sake, not for fortune or attention or applause. The work comes from heaven anyway. Why not give it back? To labor in this way, The Bhagavad-Gita tells us, is a form of meditation and a supreme species of spiritual devotion
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Resistance is directly proportional to love. If you're feeling massive Resistance, the good news is, it means there's tremendous love there too. If you didn't love the project that is terrifying you, you wouldn't feel anything. The opposite of love isn't hate; it's indifference. The more Resistance you experience, the more important your unmanifested art/project/enterprise is to you—and the more gratification you will feel when you finally do it. 
 
Seeking support from friends and family is like having your people gathered around at your deathbed. It's nice, but when the ship sails, all they can do is stand on the dock waving goodbye. Any support we get from persons of flesh and blood is like Monopoly money; it's not legal tender in that sphere where we have to do our work. In fact, the more 
energy we spend stoking up on support from colleagues and loved ones, the weaker we become and the less capable of handling our business. 
 
But rationalization has its own sidekick. It's that part of our psyche that actually believes what rationalization tells us. 
It's one thing to lie to ourselves. It's another thing to believe it. 
 
Resistance is fear. But Resistance is too cunning to show itself naked in this form. Why? Because if Resistance lets us see clearly that our own fear is preventing us from doing our work, we may feel shame at this. And shame may drive us to act in the face of fear. Resistance doesn't want us to do this. So it brings in Rationalization. Instead of showing us our fear (which might shame us and impel us to do our work), Resistance presents us with a series of plausible, rational justifications for why we shouldn't do our work. We never say, "I'm never going to do this", but rather that we'll do it tomorrow.
 
The essence of professionalism is the focus upon the work and its demands, while we are doing it, to the exclusion of all else. The ancient Spartans schooled themselves to regard the enemy, any enemy, as nameless and faceless. In other words, they believed that if they did their work, no force on earth could stand against them.
 
Victory will come when it is ready. As a pro, I may not always produce great work but I produce regardless. The joy that comes from consistently producing work and beating Resistance is second to none. Thus, I win.
