Photoshop -> photo editing, Kaster (pixel) images
AI: drawing, vector (no pixels), resolution independent graphics
inDesign - multipage
 
Command z = undo
Command + = zoom, - = zoom out
Hold shift while resizing to keep proportions
Command y = outline view
Command r = rulers
Command j = join
Option - move just 1 side curve
 
Transform palette - scale stroke and effects when resizing
 
Fashion classroom
 
Open pics in photoshop
Unlock layer
Command t - transform to tilt
 
Drawing flats
Draw half of individ shapes (of a guideline)
Copy, flip, align, join
 
Pathfinder: combine, divide objects
Ungroup to separate
 
Resolution
High >= 300 dpi. For printing
Low. less than 300. For web
 
Image - image size - resolution to see resolution
72 ppi typical for internet
Make sure to shoot in high res!! Have to get original
More pixels = more light info
 
Canvas - the working space
Comand d = deselect
Checkers = transparency
 
Clone stamp. Diameter and hardness, opacity
Spot healing brush test - no need for sampling
Patch tool.
Like putting on makeup/concealer. Use soft, sheer layers
Translucent powder on shiny face
Surface blur layer - foundation/matte layer
Can erase areas where you don’t want blur
 
Use history to step backwards. Last 30 actions. Can revert to last saved
 
Layers; unlock by drag lock to garbage
Duplicate: draw to new page
See under - click eyeball next to it
Merge visible - flatten image
Fewer layers, less space
 
Marquee tool - help colour w/i lines
Select inverse to colour only outside
Shift with selection: select 1+ things at a time
Option w/ selection: need selection already. Take part of selection out (selection w/i selection)
Lassoo, polygonal, magnetic (weird guesses), magic wand (guesses-can choose tolerance)
Quick selection tool: modifying selectors, option to nudge smaller
 
Adjustment layers: can filter (adjust photo w/o damaging orig photo)
 
2 main colour codes
RGB - for screens (light emitting devices), low res
Colours merge into white
CMYK (cyan, magenta, yellow, key/black(: pigments. No white, just paper
For high res, prints. Will be duller-may change saturation to offset
 
Image - mode. To change colour code in PS
Grayscale, no colour, just black (not black mixed from other colours
 
Tab - hide toolbars
