File formats
CS3 - lose artboards
Cs4 - raster effects (ex. Drop shadows) are embedded imgs
Cs6 - likely won’t lose stuff, best bet for cross compatibility
 
Ctrl W to close all docs
N - no, y - yes, esc - cancel
 
Artboard tool ctrl o
Click to select one, but if you click again, creates another artboard inside to fit whats inside
Drag to move
Some gotchas--if elements overlap artboards, can drag along other stuff
Can choose to move artboards w/o moving the content
 
Drag to create a new artboard
Click on center and hold control, will size it around center
 
Alt - double cursor, will copy
 
Creating an artboard containing the artboards
Shift and drag so you make a new one instead of altering existing ones
Newest boards are on top. To reach one underneath, click on title (good habit to do)
 
Artboard panel from windows
Can drop them up/down the list to change its order in the stack
Easy place to rename artboards
To zoom in on an artboard, click on it's #, not it's name
 
No way to resize multiple artboards at once
Double click artboard to fit it to artwork
 
Changing where 0, 0 is on the ruler
Can click on an artboard, then double click where rulers meet, will go to top L corner
Or drag out from ruler intersection
 
- Values go left and up
In artboard mode, global ruler always. Outside of that, can switch. View - ruler - change to global rulers
 
Command 0 - center
Command 1 - actual size (100%)
Ctrl spacebar - zoom in tool
al t spacebar - zoom out
Alt with mouse scroll
Can also drag R or L with zoom key
    Need animated scrolling. Under rocket ship btn, can draw marquee to zoom in
 
Preview in GPU
New feature, preview is faster/smoother, but can have problems, on vid card
If buggy, switch back to preview on CPU
 
Hand tool. Hold spacebar
Also mouse scroll works up and down. Ctrl to move L and R
 
Fastest - navigator panel
Ctrl tab. Move between open files
Can view multiple docs at once
 
Setting up own workspace
Essentials - new workspace. Save
 
Screen modes. F key, twice to go full screen
Bottom of left toolbar
Tab - hide toolbars but not menu
 
GUIDES
Shift and drag - move tick by tick on ruler
Double click - creates one at that spot
Drag and alt - switch 90 deg
Ctrl and drag from intersection -- create 2 guidelines at a time
Can align guides
 
LINES
Alt key - the point you first click becomes center instead of an end
Shift - lines of multiples of 45 deg, also for dragging
 
Command D - duplicate (repeat transformation/do again)
Or alt after shift to duplicate
Shift while dragging, lines in multiples of 45
 
Move tool - press enter if on any arrow tool
Arrow shortcuts a and v
Shift x - switch fill and stroke colours
 
F - flip key (arc tool, flip direction)
While drawing/holding an arc, can press up and down arrows
Ctrl will bring back last used arrow
 
Rectangular grid tool
Use arrows to +/- rows/columns
Make guides - convert anything to a guide
Sometimes smart guides mess stuff up
 
Polar grid tool
Up and down arrows - add circles, L/R - add wedges
Usually used as guides
 
Spiral
r key - reflect
up and down to add segments
alt when drag - will add/- as see fit
ctrl - collapse
 
ctrl K - preferences
arrow increment - use 0.1 or 1 px
shift will move it 10x
 
command J. join but mess up levers
command shift
 
if you accidentally draw on wrong layer - select, then move the lil box in layers panel
click alt to copy and move it
 
if align doens't quite seem to be working - use preview bounds
 
ellipse
spacebar and drag - reposition the shape
ctrl & drag - stays along where you first clicked for alignment
alt click - original point becomes center
 
ctrl C, then ctrl F to paste in front
 
compound paths - make
for cutting holdes out of stuff
 
rectangles
corner widgets - can change border radius. double click for transform box
 
pentagon and star
auto draws from center
up/down to add sides/spikes (least is triangle)
shift - upright, keep certain angles
ctrl on star - can make more pointy
alt - opposite spikes align
 
copying smth and paste on another layer
make sure, in layers, paste remembers layer is turned off, so it goes onto the right layer
 
group isolation mode
double click on item you want
can isolate smth stuck in compound path
 
can also paste in back
can also scale by something with its stroke
 
tilde - draw severl line/shape at once
flare tool - special effects
 
inkjet - use RGB, they expect RGB
CYMK for professional print, commercial production. toner based, much less bright
 
HSB is a lot easier to work w/ in RGB
hue: core colour, measured in degrees as if colours were in a circle
saturation: intensity, in %
brightness: also a %
 
the color panel spectrum
good for getting base color, but missing a lot of colors. need to modify manually
 
global swatches - linked to objects. change the color, all the objs update too
in swatches, has a lil white wedge on bottom
select similar objs - fill colour - select global in swatch options
bug right now, add global swatch first before can change the name
 
suggest dragging swatches to save in order
x switches between stroke/fill
can double click on fill, search swatches
look for swatches you made -- search with e or a, will get most of them
can select all unused swatches and delete them (doesn't work 100%)
saving swatches you've used in document
    marquee objs w/ these colours and Add Selected Colours
    or just Add Used Colors
    auto cecomes global
 
eyedropper shortcut "i"
lifts both stroke and fill on selected obj
shift click - replace the active attribute with whatever colour you clicked on
alt - becomes a colour squirter
Doesn’t lift some things, like arowheads. Press enter for options to change that
 
dragging colours - shape doesn't have to be selected
affects current attribute
or shift drag, affects opposite attributes
swatches are saved in documents--but are just ai files. can grab in library
 
compound paths - provide uniform stroke/fill
often used for text, ahnddrawn and otherwise
stroke aka line weight
0.25pt (hairline), thinnest an output device can render
ctrl H - remove view of segments and points
 
can change how stroke aligns (inside, outside, center is default)
only works with closed shapes
cap - open path line sonly, affect ends
corners - affects joins
 
save selection
ex. grab all letters, save, now can select all those at a time. list under select tab
 
dashed lines
2nd icon - allows AI to adjust to make corners & endpoints look better
 
changing width profiles on strokes
width tool (shift w)
click to create width pts (or find 1 if non std width)
drag handles to change width
can drag width points down the path
path does not need to be selected
opt - can do assymetric width (only 1 side of path changes)
technically a reg 20 pt line is 10pts on either side
can flip profiles
double click to do it alterically
alt and drag - duplicate width pt
can choose to 'adjust w/ neighboring width pts'
    more precise way to align stroke, esp open path
can add custom width profiles. these are saved globally
 
apperance panel
can add multiple strokes, see how things are stacked.
stroke and fill can be in front of/behind each other
 
creating appearnce of depth
can select a stroke, go up to distort/effects, transform, move slightly skewed
also drop shadows
also duplicating something, makeing it darker, offsetting it
 
TEXT
AI not a page editor -- do own margins as a rectangle guide
paste on all artboards
ai does not spell check welll...
better to do typing elsewhere and ctrl place it in
a red + sign at bottom of text - overflow text, extra text not fitting into box
click on it, will load up your mouse to put elsewhere
will show links of how its threaded together
 
area type options - rows/columns for text, can also offset position of text
control panel - doc setup - type. specify quote conventions
smart punctuation - replace/fix special chars/broken type
 
point vs area type
point does not overflow. not like an obj. is default with type tool, centered around a dot/point. good for single lines
can switch between types with lil ball widget on R
area type will adjust to teh box, overflow. best for large text
bounding box is confusing when with pt text.
 
join tool - where pencil tool is
great for joining what doesn't exactly touch. need to select the appropriate paths
 
object - path - outline stroke
changing a stroke to a path outline
 
shape builder tool
enter for options
used reset and then pick color from artwork
need to select, drag through
has a + sign on mouse. alt to get it to - (remove shapes instead of add)
if you just click, will divide all the shapes up
can also use shift to marquee your shapes to add/- them
 
path offset - make a path a lil smaller/bigger
 
page icon - usually means duplicate selection)
text - create out line. turns into obj
 
shapebuilder options
gap detection - can choose hwo big, will connect and fill gaps for you. not perfect tho
merge mode - click to split paths
 
shaper tool: also under pencil tool
fixes your hand drawn ugly shapes...
certain angles though
can also combine shapes - make sure everything is deselected, draw zigzag over it
    if you start zigzag from outside, will subtract
the shapes become a "shaper group"
dbl click to access a pc and do a diff fill
"constructor mode" click on down pointing arrow widget on box. allows you to move paths around
also works as a selector tool
 
PENCIL TOOL
enter for options
    fidelity - accurate or can make smooth
    does not auto close paths - can choose to close paths when ends are within x pixels
    can choose edit selected paths, to combine paths
fixing the path
    can use pencil to redraw (if closed, will auto use the new part)
    smooth tool - draw line, the segment between the 2 pts will smooth out
    path eraser - delete path between 2 pts
can connect 2 paths, use pencil tool, allow edit selected paths, select the things you wanna connect and draw connection
shift with pencil - that selection will be straight at some 45 deg angle
alt - straight with any angle
 
in layers, can choose to make smth a template. will dim it out
ctrl click a layer to turn it into outline mode
 
PEN TOOL
smooth pt - ensures segments on either side are smooth
shift - handles are within 45 deg
spacebar and drag - move the point
ctrl - other control bar doesn't move with it
rule of 3rds - for smooth curve, 2/3 of length should be control levers
while drawing, use ctrl to alter the path w/o losing the path
cusp points (corners) . alt drag
    or click again on pt to get rid of extra control handle
make sure curves have 2 handles
when you first start, get use to get a control ba first
adding anchor points - will be cusps if straight line, smooth if curve
    ctrl to move the pt
anchor tool
    drag from a point to get control handles
    control click a handle to remove it
if drawing things where overlap - make sure its deselected (shift ctrl a) so it draws new line instead of connecting
lil closed circle = close, / is continue, * is new path
 
blob brush
great coloring tool
auto joins paths in same color
can fill in messily, send it to back
    make sure path is not compound. R click, release compound
    if group, ungroup and deal with culprit
use eraser tool. will only delete from selected things
 
 
