PARADOX OF UNANIMITY: occurs when data seems too amazing to be true
ex. large groups of people agree on something too much, data from complex systems is too consistent, results conform to expectations too well
likely a result of systematic error, bias, or corruption, then to actually be true
be highly skeptical! such perfect data is highly unlikely
 
FLEXIBILITY TRADEOFFS: as flexibility of a design increases, the usability and performance decreases
flexibility requires satisfying a larger set of requirements, which may conflict with one another. this requires compromise and complexity, increasing cost while decreasing performance/usability
ask these 5 q's. if one is no, not justified
    is suboptimal good enough?
    is the performance env stable?
    are performance & user requirements similar?
    can functions be modulated in the design?
    does the value of flexibility justify the performance tradeoffs?
ex. that army plane is not justified. smartphones are justified
"jack of all trades, master of none"
 
ALIGNMENT
human perception. things that are aligned are perceived to be more related than things that are not aligned
things that are aligned lead the eye, which then influences the sequence in which people process information
west: top to down, left to right
every element in a design should align with atleast one other element. none should be left dangling
    exception: when you are trying to create a sense of disorder
influence sequence of how elements are perceived and acted upon, improve usability and reduce errors
"keep your ducks in a row"
 
FEATURE CREEP
continuous expansion of addition of new project features beyond the original scope
biggest causes of cost and schedule overruns
reasons it may occur
    features are easy/convenient to add
    features accumulate over multiple generations of a product
    features are added to appease internal project stakeholders
 
internal audience problem: designers and marketers think they know whats best for the customer, but they're often wrong
the key driver to this: the belief that more is better, so features are continuously added and rarely taken away
 
best case: feature creep changes scope of a proj, increasing time and cost w/ nominal impact on performance and customer experience
worst case: unintended performance or usability consequences
 
how to avoid this
    be on lookout for it
    ensure features are linked to customer need
    when doing updated versions, also ask what can be subtracted
    add a freezepoint (no more adding features)
 
DESIRE LINES
traces of use or wear that indicate preferred methods of interaction
think of worn out paths on grass vs sidewalks
peril of designer-centered design. all too often, designers don't know best
user-centered design philosophy: develop a deep understanding of how people interact/use a thing, and let that inform/guide the design
most reliable indication of interaction. its noninvasive, unbiased, statistical.
if you ask someone how they use something, their responses are never reliable
you can observe them, but being watched/videoed alters their behaviour
"explore the road most travelled... there is much to be learned there"
 
TOP DOWN LIGHTING BIAS
tendency to interpret objects as being lit from a single light source from above
dark/shade appears farthest from light source, light as closer
make things look 3d
ex. the statue. looks thoughtful when lit from top left, ghostly if from below
objects look most natural when lit from top-left, rather than from above. also will look more inviting
things lit from bottom look unnatural and scary
"put your design in the best possible light"
 
ITERATION
repeating a set of design, development and test operations, with each repetition building on the last, until the desired result is achieved
ex. build human powered airplane. the problem is not building the plane. its how to get thru these iterations fast enough
fail fast, fail often
involves experiments that don't work, dead ends that take time to explore
failure is not the end. its another iteration
gall's law: all complex systems that work evolved from simpler systems that worked
 
GARBAGE IN, GARBAGE OUT (GIGO)
quality of system output is largely dependent on quality of system input
garbage in
    problems of type - wrong kind of data
    problems of quality - right data but with mistakes
well designed systems deal with GIGO in 4 ways
    prevent bad input
    correct bad input
    prevent bad output
    correct bad output
 
HICK'S LAW
the time it takes to make a decision increases with the number of options
applies to all decisions
the more prey there are, longer it takes for a predator to choose one to hunt
more karate moves you know, longer it takes to decide which to use
does not apply to complex decision making or decisions requiring reading, scanning, searching, extended deliberation
aka only simple quick decisions. doesn't apply to multichoice test or complex menu
if response time is critical, keep number of options small - 5 or less
systems with fewer choices are almost always rated as easier to understand and more satisfying than similar products with more options
highlighting: when a few items stand out, people are no longer picking equivalent items in a list. response times are quickened
reduce noise and distractions: when choices have distractions, they act like additional choices and slow response time
ex. gaming controls. too complicated, hard to learn, less fun for everyone
 
KISS (Keep it Simple Stupid)
simple systems work better than complex systems
simplicity should be a key goal in design
given 2 functionally equivalent systems, the one with minimal parts, with minimal interactions between those parts, will be faster and cheaper to build, perform more reliably, and easier to troubleshoot
however innovative designs rarely start off simply. KISS should be applied later in the process
what can be removed without hurting performance?
 
LEFT DIGIT EFFECT (pricing strategy)
consumers overweigh the left most digits of prices
29.99 vs 30
we process our emotional feeling after seeing the first digit
not always a good strategy. ending in 99 feels like discount/low quality, while rounded numbers feel high price/quality
 
ROOT CAUSE
want for a nail proverb
temptation to presume that problems have a single, proximal cause
root cause analysis: way of understanding problems in terms of their causes. goal: finding the first event that caused everything else
everything after the root cause is a symptom. treating the symptom won't cure the disease
5 whys. ask 5x why an event occurred
be sure to identify and solve the right problem, and more deeply understand problems and identify the causal links where you have the most leverage
 
SUNK COST EFFECT
tendency to continue investing in an endeavor because of heavy past investments of time, effort or money
rationally, only cost benefits of current options should influence decisions, not past investments
this happens because people fear failure more than they desire for success, and don't want to feel/appear wasteful
this is a very strong bias. people who know about it are just as susceptible to it as students who haven't heard of it
telltale phrases
    we have too much invested to quit
    we owe it to those who have sacrificed
    we can't quit now after all we've put into this
often a significant negative emotional event is required to disrupt this tendency
 
SELECTION BIAS
a bias in the way evidence is collected that distorts our analysis and conclusions
humans are pattern detecting and pattern making machines. when we see dots, we try to connect them
are the dots we've collected worthy of collecting?
prevention
    small populations: collect data from everyone
    if you can't collect from everyone: random sampling. sample from the full set of things you are generalizing about (ex. the bomber planes and adding armour. his sample was not random, included only planes that returned)
 
IKEA EFFECT
the act of creating a thing, or partially creating a thing, increases the perceived value to the creator
people are willing to pay more than equivalent preassembled products, and value as much as if an expert made it
cake mixes - required breaking of eggs and played up the decoration part, helping people feel emotional investment, like chefs
this effects only when tasks are completed. if the effort is too much, people don't finish
 
RED EFFECTS
set of cognitive and behavioural effects triggered by exposure to the color red
distinguishing red from other colors is one of our most ancient abilities
red is powerful, dangerous, lust, blood and fire, dominance
a number of diff effects, but top 3
    red makes women more attractive to men. red can make both genders more attractive
    wearing red in sports contest confers a small competitive advantage (when evenly matched, wear red--they win more than 60% of the time in these circumstances. a small but significant improvement)
    appears to impair problem solving/creativity (children exposed to red performed worse than all other color conditions). avoid red before a test, and in environments requiring learning, testing, cooperation
 
BLACK EFFECTS
black is absence of light, white is mix of all colored light, but from the perspective of what our brains see, black and white are the only truly universal colors
across all languages, words for black and white exist, and the words are some of the most ancient
set of cognitive/behavioural effects triggered by exposure to black
associated with evil, foreboding, aggression, dominance
"black dog syndrome": difficulty of getting black dogs adopted vs the relative ease of lighter colored dogs
sport teams in black are perceived to be more aggressive and more likely to cheat
    get penalized more
black products, esp glossy ones, are perceived as classy, high value, timeless
hence high priced items tend to come in black, while lower priced versions tend to come in bright hues
a premium product will prob come in black
a salesperson wearing dark colors is seen as more threatening and less approachable than one in light colours
    prob not so good for sales, but better for security guards, judges, etc
useful for highlighting key lines/outlining. easy way to make designs look more polished and finished
 
WHITE EFFECTS
associated with moral goodness, security, passivity, safety
in placebo pills, white colored ones perceived as least potent
police uniforms: white and light colored are perceived as more passive, approachable, helpful, honest
black police uniform: rated mean, forceful, aggressive, corrupt
in a study of sport plays, with identical moves but diff colors, white is rated as less aggressive, less dirty, less likely to be penalized
white products, esp white glossy, are seem as classy, high value, timeless
high priced items often come in white, less expensive in hues
use for associations to calmness, honesty, cleanliness
 
WEAKEST LINK
use of elements in a system designed to fail in order to protect more important elemets in that system from harm
ex. the car. a rigid car shell transfers all the kinetic energy to the weakest link, the passenger compartment. creating crumple zones meant those failed, while passenger zones were protected
1. halt or disconnect systems when they fail
2. mitigate damage during or after system failure
applicable to all systems with cascading fault conditions (ex. chain of events that can be interrupted)
if you decide to add a weak link, verify that the link only fails under appropriate, predefined conditions (not in regular use), and reliably fails when conditions warrant
 
SUPERNORMAL STIMULI
variation of a familiar stimulus that elicits a response stronger than the stimulus for which it evolved from
anything that sells like crazy is probably some type of this
ex. the gull chicks responding to red sticks with yellow stripes (like a beak)
ex. hyper-masculinized/feminized superheroes,, exaggerated face/body of dolls, unnatural fat/sugar combos
the younger people are, the more susceptible they are to these kinds of stimuli
how to use
    faces, particular eyes - tweak our instinct for recognizing/interpreting faces/expressions
    provocative images - instinct for finding mates/competition
    continuous rapid stimuli in games - instinct for responding to sudden movement
can identify supernormal stimuli by exploring well established biases/preferences
    ex. humans, esp females, like baby faces, so babyish cute things are appealing
    v shaped torsos on men/hourglass on women ae appealing
so highly exaggerated forms of both are appealing. design with human instincts in mind
 
PERFORMANCE LOAD
the mental and physical effort required to complete a task
minimize performance load. the higher it is, the more errors/time to perform increases
don't make me think, don't make me move
can help make things more usable for everybody
does not always apply, ex. for building memories/learning, building muscles
or don't want too hard but neither too easy. ex. video games need some difficulty to be entertaining
 
minimizing the mental
    reduce visual complexity
    reduce number of things that need to be remembered
    automate memory/computational tasks when possible
minimizing the physical
    reduce # of steps in tasks
    reduce physical effort needed
    automate when possible
 
for tasks requiring a prescribed amount of effort, consider diff users levels that vary the complexity of interaction. significant amount of testing needed to find right load
 
FORGIVENESS
help people avoid errors whenever possible, and protect them from harm when they do occur
should always be considered a priority. errors and failures will occur, good design prevents these events from causing harm
ways to incorporate forgiveness
    prevent harmful conditions from occurring using affordances/constraints
    warn people of harmful conditions before they occur w/ alerts
    request confirmations when people make choices that can cause harm
    when harmful conditions do occur, allow them to be reversed when possible
    when all else fails, have a safety net as a last ditch catch-all to prevent harm
forgiveness benefits
    minimize harm
    provide sense of security and stability (fosters willingness to learn, explore, use a design)
    cultivate loyalty (after using forgiving designs, won't want to go back to less forgiving alternatives)
 
FIGURE-GROUND effect
the brain tries to separate the perceived world into two categories
    figure: object of focus
    ground: periphery or background
gestalt switch: mental switch from seeing the world one way to another complete diff way
fedex logo has a hidden white arrow
rubin's vase image. even so, can only ever see 1 image at a time
stable images: perceive figure and ground in one way. bi-stable: switch back and forth
figure elements receive more attention and are better remembered than ground
elements below a horizon line, or in lower regions of a design, are more likely to be perceived as figures
bi-stable can grab attention, is fun for the brain. when relevant to the brand, makes logos more memorable
may occasionally want unstable. ex. camouflage, or stuff where things pop out at you and disappear into horizon
 
CROWD INTELLIGENCE
arising from the unwitting collab of many people
crowd: group of people whose members contribute independently to solving a problem. wide range of people, better result
with guessing games, the average estimate of the crowd is more accurate than all individual estimates
works best on simple problems that have clear right/wrong answers. not creativity/innovation
in product surveys. instead of asking, would you buy this? ask, how many people do you think will buy this product in the next 6 months?
 
ERRORS
an action that yields an unintended result.
1. slips
    errors of action/execution
    occur when an action performed is not what was intended
    prevention: design look/arrangement of controls to minimize accidental activation
2. lapses
    errors of attention. when a person forgets to perform an action, typically due to distractions/passage of time
    prevention: use alarms and checklists
3. mistakes
    errors of intention/planning
    intention to do something is incorrect/inappropriate
    prevention: provide clear/timely feedback, intuitive control layouts, appropriate training
should also have safety nets to prevent failure across all error types
 
AESTHETIC USABILITY EFFECT
beautiful objects are perceived to be easier to use than ugly objects, whether they are or not
goes against the idea of form follows function. make things work, then make it beautiful
in products that perform the same, the more beautiful one is seen as easier to use, and people are more positive, caring, loyal, and patient/tolerant when things go wrong
once these responses are formed, they are hard to change. early impressions influence long term attitudes
 
80/20 RULE
80% of a site's traffic are on 20% of the site
80% profits from 20% customers
focusing on the critical 20%, make a high impact with low cost
breakdowns may differ. regardless, ask: what is the critical component driving the majority?
 
BABY-FACE BIAS
instinctive preference, to see things with baby-faced features as having the cuteness/personality of babies. strongest to women/kids
light hair/skin, high foreheads, round features*, large eyes*, small noses, short chins: perceived as more naive, helpless, honest
does your design benefit from being perceived as babyish?
baby faced adults are perceived as simple and naive, more likely to be found innocent when the alleged crime is intentional, and guilty when alleged crime involves negligence. when they plead guilty, receive harsher sentences than mature-faced defendants
 
COGNITIVE DISSONANCE
state of mental discomfort that results from incompatible attitudes, thoughts, or beliefs
the ben franklin book borrowing example
to reconcile the mental conflict, people seek an "out", which can be used as a means of persuasion
small favour, big favour
ex. diamonds. prove your love by buying one. if you don't buy it, means you don't love them enough--else, buy them one
construct situations that create a mental conflict, then provide an out that alleviates the conflict and creates a favorable outcome
the out typically buying a product/service
 
CONSISTENCY
consistency enables people to
    efficiently transfer knowledge to new contexts
    learn new things more quickly
    focus attention on the relevant aspects of a task
4 types of consistency
    visual: same or similar elements are depicted the same way
    functional: same or similar controls function the same way. increases predictability and creates sense of security and safe use
    internal consistency: same or similar elements are visually and functionally the same inside a system. allow for knowledge of one part of the system to transfer to other parts of the system
    external consistency: same/similar elements are visually & functionally the same outside a system. extends benefits of internal consistency across outside things
use all 4 types. reduce error and training times
principle of least astonishment/surprise: design elements to appear and behave in such a way that least surprises your users
 
DESIGN BY COMMITTEE
design process based on consensus building, group decision making, extensive iteration
seen as inefficient and frustrating, costly in time/budget, lacking in aesthetics/innovation (averages out design)
this can be true, but can be favorable when
    requirements are highly complex (not just aesthetics)
    tolerance for risk is low (ex. a building), consequences of error are serious
    stakeholder buy in is important
    suggest diverse committee members of 7-12/committee, adopt governance model to facilitate decision-making and prevent deadlocks
    slow, but careful
design by dictator (one person) is favorable when
    projects are time/budget driven
    requirements are straightforward
    consequences of error are tolerable
    stakeholder buy in is less important
    innovation
    fast, but risky
 
EXPECTATION EFFECTS
change in a person's perception/behaviour by making them aware of an expected outcome
halo effect: employers rate the performance of certain employees more highly based on overall positive impression of those employees
hawthorne effect: employees are more productive based on their belief that changes made to the environment will increase productivity
pygmalion effect: students perform better or worse based on expectations of their teacher
placebo: experience treatment effects based on belief that a treatment will work
demand characteristics: participants in an experiment/interview respond/act in ways they believe are expected of them
 
have to guard against this in research contexts. blind both researchers and participants by masking information
in marketing, tell people how to perceive your product, instead of having them guess
 
FACTORS OF SAFETY
designing components/systems beyond expected loads to offset the effects of unknown vars and prevent failure
factor safety of...
    1: handle anticipated load and no more
    2: handle 2x anticipated load
non life critical product designs, factor safety of just over 1
plane components, 1.5-2.5, bridges, 5-7, elevators 12
adding factors of safety usually means adding weight. where weight is a critical param, adding too much material to beef up the system can cut into factor of safety. tradeoff needs to be considered
use higher factor of safety when ignorance about design params are high, and when consequences of failure are high
keep in mind adding factor of safety will also likely increase cost and complexity
also applies to unexpected traffic loads, delays/lengthy queues, etc
Can’t anticipate unknown unknowns, but can design for it
 
GLOSS BIAS
general human preference for glossy vs dull objects
even people who consciously think they prefer matte, often end up buying glossy, especially in impulse buy or when objs are displayed side by side
choose glossy for mass market appeal. in niche audience with experience w/ diff finishes, use matte to help differentiate
exception: non glossy when objs pose a mouthing/swallowing hazard to young children
 
GOLDEN RATIO
ratio within elements of a form, such as height to width, which approximates 1.618
mass market paperbacks are golden rectangles
evidence that this is true for lines and rectangles, but not more complex shapes
 
MAFA EFFECT (most average facial appearance)
the most average facial appearance of a population is more attractive han faces that deviate from the average
can composite images of faces from target populations (digital compositing/morphing software) for ads, esp when real models are unavailable/budget is limited
clues on how to be more attractive
    smooth/even skin complexion/color
    more symmetrical features
    minimize idiosyncrasies
 
ARCHETYPES
universal patterns of form, social role, and story that have innate appeal or influence; instinctive appeal
examples of form: face (esp baby faces), glossy faceted stones, horns, canine teeth, snakes, spiders, provocative forms
examples of social role: ruler, hero, rebel, mentor, trickster, villain
examples of story: quest, tragedy, voyage and return, conquering the monster
most effective with mass market audiences vs niche audiences w/ specialized training
since archetypes influence perception on an unconscious/emotional level, most useful...
    complement traditional designs
    influence behaviour across cultures
    communicate emotional messages when traditional modes of communication can't be used
used by most marketing
 
FACE-ISM RATIO
ratio of face to body in an image
calculate by distance of top of head to bottom of chin, divided by top of head to lowest visible part of body
full head and body: face-ism ratio of .13
classic portrait shot: face-ism ~.5
high face-ism ratio: focus on intellect, personality. seen as intelligent, dominant, ambitious.
full body - focus on physical, sensual. less intelligent, dominant, ambitious
in magazines, photos of men tend to have higher face-ism ratios than women
use high face-ism for more thoughtful associations, and low face-ism for more ornamental/provocative associations
 
FIVE HAT RACKS
5 ways to organize information
    alphabetical
        good if referential in nature
        efficient non linear access to specific items is required
        no other strategy is appropriate
    category
        clusters of similarity exist
        when people naturally seek info by category
    continuum (organization by magnitude)
        comparing across a common measure
    location
        when orienting/wayfinding are important
        information is meaningfully related to the geography of a place
    time
        when presenting/comparing events over fixed durations
        time-based sequence is involved
answer questions clearly, esp when time is short and stress is high
 
FLOW
getting people into the zone
pacman
right balance between task difficulty and skill level
    too hard, skill low: anxiety, worry
    too easy, high skill: relaxation, boredom
    difficulty = skill low: arousal, interest, increased sense of control
    flow: just hard enough to challenge a person at their skill level
achieve by..
    match difficulty to skill
    create clear hierarchy of goals, little goals building to higher goals
    provide clear, immediate feedback
get people into the zone!
 
FREEZE-FLIGHT-FIGHT-FORFEIT (4 Fs)
modern fight or flight, and in order
instinctive responses
    1. freeze: threat is suspected. stop, look, listen for threats
    2. flight: threat is detected. escape the threat
    3. fight: unable to escape, neutralize the threat
    4. forfeit: when unable to neutralize the threat, surrender
stages can be skipped, and people may react differently to stimuli
consider the 4Fs in design of systems that involve performance under extreme stress
in anticipation of diminished performance capabilities...
    simplify tools, plans, displays
    controls that need motor control only, forgiveness to prevent/minimize effects of errors
    mitigate tunnel vision with highly visible critical elements
    avoid overusing alerts/alarms that undermine concentration
design with stress in mind
 
LEGIBILITY
visual clarity of text
how to ensure legibility
size: measured in pts from top of ascenders to bottom of descenders
    9 - 12 pts
    smaller sizes are ok in small chunks, ex. captions/footnotes
    larger for low res, young/old audiences
high contrast: color doesn't affect, but contrast between colors does. avoid background patterns
font family: doesn't matter, but professionally made ones typically better
case: first letter of sentences. all caps takes longer to read, use for short lines (ex. headings) only
line length: 10-12 words/line
line spacing: 1 to 4 units
improving legibility improves communication
 
MAYA (most advanced yet acceptable) principle
determining the most commercially visible aesthetic for a design
aesthetic appeal is a balancing act between familiarity and novelty
    most advanced form of a design, that is still recognizable as member of its product category, is most pleasing to mass market
be careful not to introduce radical innovations all at once, rather in gradual steps over multiple product releases
bridge innovation to the familiar with metaphors
if you change something consider providing a classic mode for users who need more time to acclimate to the new design
only aesthetically sophisticated clients will weigh novelty higher than familiarity
 
MENTAL MODELS
system models: of how things work ex. engineer. knows how things work, but not how people use things
interaction models: how to use or interact with something. ex user. know how to use something but not how it works
designers need to have both models to bridge the gap
when mental model !== reality, errors occur
well established mental models are hard to change
leverage existing mental models, don't' go against them
use your own products!!
 
MODULARITY
structural principle used to manage complexity, reduce costs, increase reliability in complex systems
identify functional clusters of similarity in systems, group into mini systems called modules
motorcycle example
instead of rigid manufacturing chain, where everyone develops to exact specs, give broad params and freedom to improvise/innovate. suppliers will find ways to cut costs and improve quality
however, modular systems can be complex and hard to manage. most systems slowly modularize as a product matures
galls law: complex systems come from simple systems
 
ORIENTATION SENSITIVITY
certain line orientations are more easily processed and discriminated than others
lines differing <30 deg from background are difficult to detect
compositions where primary elements are vertical/horizontal are considered more aesthetic than diagonal
oblique effect: ability to more accurately perceive line orientations that are close to vertical and horizontal
pop out effect: tendency of certain elements to pop out as figure elements, and as a result be quickly and easily detected, esp when it differs >30 deg from background
important in designing gauges/displays. provide visual indicators at 30 deg increments, with horizontal/vertical anchors
 
REDUNDANCY
using back-up or fail-safe elements to maintain system performance in the event of failure
primary method of preventing catastrophic failure
redundancy can add weight and complexity, which can compromise performance and reliability. use right kinds of redundancy to manage these tradeoffs
4 types of redundancy
additive: use multiple elements of a single type. simple to implement and maintain, susceptible to single cause of failure. ex. many strands make up rope
    when probable causes of failure can be anticipated
diverse: multiple elements of diff types. resistant to single caose of failure, complex to maintain/implement
    when probable causes of failure cannot be anticipated
active: application of redundant elements at all times. distribute load across elements, allows for element repair, failure, substitution with minimal disruption of system. ex. poles holding up building
    for when systems must maintain stable performance in event of element failure
passive: apply redundant elements only when active element fails ex. spare tire. siplest, most common kind of redundancy, for non critical elements that result in system failure
    for when interruptions in performance are tolerable
can use multiple to increase factors of safety
 
SATISFICING
in certain circumstances, roughly satisfying design requirements is more productive than optimally satisfying them
problem solving strategy
3 situations to consider satisficing
    very complex problems
    time limited problems
    problems for which anything beyond a satisfactory solution yields diminishing returns
aka most problems.
MVP
 
SCALING FALLACY
designing a system at one scale, then assuming it will work on a diff scale
ex. flight. flapping works for smaller birds, larger birds rely more on soaring
two assumptions in particular to consider
    load: forces and materials act the same when a design changes scale
    interaction: people will interact with a design the same way at diff scales
avoid scaling fallacy by...
    verifying assumptions, research
    educating team members
    factors of safety to offset scaling effects
 
SHAPING
breaking down a complex behaviour into a chain of simple behaviours, which are trained one by one until the complex behaviour is achieved
training pidgeons to guide bombs, physical rehab, etc
superstitious behaviours: irrelevant behaviours accidentally reinforced during training
use to train behaviours in games, learning environments/procedures, refining complex motor tasks, and cognitive tasks too
learn new things or stop old patterns
 
STORYTELLING
attach stories to brands, products, interfaces... anything... and in doing so, make things more compelling
setting, characters, plot, mood, movement
suspension of disbelief: the audience knows the story may be fiction, but are willing to suspend disbelief and get lost in the story anyways
engage audiences with a design, immerse them in it, evoke an emotional response
its what makes things more than what they are. there is a story
 
WAIST TO HIP RATIO
preference for particular ratio of waist to hip in men and women
divide circumference of waist to circumference of hip
use this ratio when designing. coca cola's bottle
feminize with ratio 0.7, masculine 0.9
 
ZEIGARNIK EFFECT
tendency to experience intrusive/interruptive thoughts about a task that is interrupted or left incomplete
rubiks cube, 15 puzzle
when unsolved, people experience a strong sense of dissatisfaction/unrest
long for closure. can't focus on other things
motivation is a factor too
leave people hanging
said to be that it is the subconscious that hangs onto undone things/keeps working on it when interrupted/undone. these benefits are lost after finishing the task
ex. waiters who forget the details of an order after its been paid
ex. students who do take breaks and do unrelated activities remember material better
 
AFFORDANCES
physical characteristics of a thing that influence its function/use
good affordance: affordance of an obj aligns with how it should be used
bad: does not align
norman doors. a class of design defects that...
    lead people to use something incorrectly
    lead people to blame themselves for the error, instead of the designer
unconscious. placing push/pull signs on doors, does not work. we act on the affordance of the handle w/o thinking about it
    don't try patch the defect. the sign just makes the user feel stupid. fix the affordance!
trying to deter graffiti. flat, big spaces of wall naturally afford graffiti, and painting over them resets this affordance. plants however will deter graffiti
perceived affordances: visual characteristics of a thing that imply its fxn/use
    ex. a square made 3d looks like a button. affords clicking
 
BLUE EFFECTS
we are attracted to clear, blue water
blue is the worlds most popular color
general context: blue/cool colours fosters openness and creativity (vs hot colors, which increase anxiety, neutral colors: no effect)
    effects are small but significant
social contexts: in all positive dimensions, blue shirt with navy pants was rated highest
    signals friendliness, approachability, peacefulness
productivity contexts: blue enriched white lights improves productivity, but is not good at night
use blue when you want a generally popular color, but avoid it in food related contexts (blue/black looks like spoiled food)
aligns well with positive, aspirational messages, but not avoidance messages (ex. cavity prevention)
 
FEEDBACK LOOPS
cause and effect chain that forms a loop
designing a system to increase output/growth: think in terms of positive feedback loops
designing a system that needs to moderate/self-manage/stabilize, think in terms of negative feedback loops
games: balance of both loops
 
FIVE TENETS OF QUEUEING
1. occupied time feels shorter than unoccupied time
    mirrors by elevators. people are distracted and complain less
2. people want to get started
    waiting in lobby at doctors, then waiting in room. basically a second waiting room, but illusion of progress
3. anxiety makes waits seem longer
    ex. assign seats, people at end of line won't fear not getting good seat
4. uncertain waits are longer than known, finite waits
    "we'll be right back" is longer than "be back in 15"
5. unfair waits are longer than equitable
    rather wait in single line for multiple checkouts than each checkout having their own line (sucks picking the slow line)
walt disney park queues: hidden switchback queues. wrapping around walls/scenes, conceal true length of line and entertain visitors as they wait. queues become like an interactive preshow
 
GREEN EFFECTS
our eyes can discriminate between more colors of green than any other color
color of choice for creating associations with nature
approach motivation: green tends to make us want to approach things, intrinsically appealing/inviting
green reduces stress/anxiety, opens mind, frees our thinking. increases performance vs urban/concrete walks/images
use to reduce stress/mental fatigue, ex. hospitals
good for places like schools, offices
use green signage/controls to indicate safe passage/non dangerous functions
can use green, plants, or nature scenes
if attractiveness is important, don't wear green! a person in green is rated less attractive than all other colors except yellow
 
NUDGE
method of modifying behaviour without restricting options/changing incentives
ie. fly in mens urinal to help with aim
1. smart defaults: clear best options for the chooser, make these options default selection
2. clear feedback: clear goals and visible performance feedback
3. aligned incentives: to preferred behaviours and avoid incentive conflicts
4. structured choices: provide means to simplify/filter complexity to facilitate decision making
5. error mitigation: assume people will make errors
6. good mappings: enable users to predict consequences of their actions
    intentional bad mappings: using points in a casino, conceal how much money people are spending
 






