Freytag’s pyramid: Beginning, inciting incident, build up to climax, falling action to denouement
 
2 plots: go on journey, or stranger comes to town
In animations: show the character’s will, not their fate
Plot vs story: story is just actions that happen one after another. Plot adds another dimension by showing how these actions are related (ex. King dies. Queen dies. Vs king dies, queen, out of grief, also dies)
 
Questions to ask to develop plot
What do your characters want?
What are their weaknesses? (this is what makes characters believable and lovable and seem real)
Where are they from? (biography and emotionally)
Where are they going?
What can the characters do to surprise you?
Follow your characters instead of leading them
 
How to sum up your plot: when (inciting incident) happens to (character), he must overcome (obstacles) to (complete the quest)
 
Write a scene of 250-350 words featuring a character with one concrete want (a table, a moose, a toothbrush, anything physical is fine!) and one weakness. Use these two features to drive the action of the plot. Set up the story where every other sentence is a rising action. To help you come up with rising actions, use one word from the following list of twelve words in each sentence that has a rising action. In other words: Write your first sentence introducing your character. Make the next sentence a rising action using one of the following twelve words. Write your third sentence, which may introduce the weakness, then write your fourth sentence with a rising action that includes one of the remaining eleven words you haven’t used. And so on.
trick
memory
aboard
tiger
pretend
carrot
appliance
cage
rings
crow
filthy
explode
You must use at least 6 of the 12 words, but you are encouraged to challenge yourself to use as many of the words as possible while still meeting the word count.
 
Sunny, a 2 year old female donkey, shifted uncomfortably in the trailer she was parked in as she became aware of something outside. She had been placed aboard this trailer 2 weeks ago, and although someone would periodically come in to clean and feed her, had not seen the light of day since. She couldn’t tell, but she often felt that they were moving.
 
She winced as she shifted onto something particularly hard, and was surprised to see that it was actually a crow that she had almost squashed. The crow looked up at her, unimpressed. 
 
 
Aristotle wrote a book called poetics, arguing that plot is most important part of drama
3 act structure
The beginning: set up characters, relationships, wants and desires
The middle: plot reaches climax
The end: plot is resolved
 
Horace devised 5 act structure (play should not be longer or shorter than 5 acts)
Emma mott did a modern 5 act structure (bird by bird author) called A B D C E
A: action, draws reader in, specific and concrete. Requires physical, doing something (not just character thinking or doing something passive
B: background/context. What was happening to these characters before the story started? Get the essential info to help determine the characters action thru the story
D: development. The meat of your story, the part where your characters deal with the rising actions, for the characters to develop themselves as they respond to succeeding and failing things along the way
C: climax. Biggest rising action, key narrative twist, things are different for your main characters in a real adn significant way
E: ending. We learn the characters we knew have become someone else as a result of the journey
Sections can be any length, though endings are usually short
 
Good stores are a circle/spiral… they leave us in the same place, but changed us in some way. Maybe we wanted something and didn’t get it, or got it with other consequences
 
Should you ever start writing without an outline?
Yes! Outlines can be helpful as a guideline, but always sit and write
Blind writing: sitting down daily to write for x hours/x words. Downside: end up throwing away a lot of pages, a lot of redundancy but also space for surprising things
Outline stories you like and use those blueprints
 
Write a very short story - not more than 200 words - about a trip to the doctor or dentist using the ABDCE structure. Identify the structural elements in your story. My example is in the assignment introduction video, and reproduced below:
 
Scene: building blocks of storytime
Students often want to write about the ‘big things’, but miss the message of staying in the physical level...
Hemingway: iceberg theory: only see a tip of what is happening to a character, and the rest is hidden
All good scenes are either: in each reason the character wants something different, thus giving the scene a reason to exist...
Argument
Seduction
Negotiation
“Show, don’t tell”... if you just keep telling, there is no scene to form in the readers mind
Helps build suspense, tension
Give the bare minimum
All good scenes need (5)
An action (actually doing something)
Dialogue (more than just people talking to each other. Should give better understanding of the character and/or advance the plot… as should all sentences really!)
Specific intimate details (things a reader can’t know without you saying)
Inner POV (what are you thinking, feeling, processin)
3 Rs: react: something active in the moment
Reflect: thinks about what they’re faced with and internally weighs options
Reveal: something to help understand who they are, how they’re going to respond
Definite starting and stopping point. Probably starting with an action, ending with the action resolved in some way
 
As with the first assignment, you will create another scene where someone wants a concrete physical object more than anything else in the world. This time, instead of focusing on rising action entirely, consider the full story structure.
Write for a few minutes, then give that character a disease where they learn they have only 24 hours to live. This is your first significant rising action.
Write some more, then give that character a choice between that object and an antidote. This is your second significant rising action.
Finish the story with a conclusion. Your final story should not exceed 500 words
 
Editing and revision (21 step process
Start with easy fixes (running spell check)
Omit needless words
Cut places where you’re doing the reading’s thinking (show don’t tell)
Cut stage direction (don’t show ever step he takes to get to the kitchen
Insure consistent character motivation
Has an action happened in the first paragraph?
Is my story coherent?
Are there complete scenes, every time?
Do i start each scene with something active?
Am i writing in in an active voice? (avoiding passive voice (there is, there are, it is, made his way… see strunk and white’s elements of style; avoiding parallel construction (using same words over and over)
Is setting working? Integral to story and contribute to understanding. Can’t just be set anywhere
Characters acting believably? Do they want something, have believable flaws
Transitions between paragraphs/sections clear?
Does the story fit together the right way? (5 act structure)
Did ie xplain to the reader every risk involved for each of the characters?
Did i explain the consequences of these risks? (the better we understand those, the more we empathize and want to follow)
Does every sentence deepen the understanding of the character or advance the plot?
Is my second draft 10% shorter than the first?
Am i ready to discard pages/entire drafts that aren’t working instead of finding endless ways to fix them?
Is what you meant in your head as clear as it can be on the page?
 
