Search “edilble wild pics” in email
 
Salal plant 
Berries edible, purple. Autumn harvest
Around city hall, under trees, low to ground
Trail berries
Flower looks like white blueberry
Leaves often at buffet
He purees with salt and cures salmon
They dry up, can keep for winter 

Oregon grape looks like holly
Super sour, but great for jam/jelly

All parts of dandelion edible, despite white sap. But get before completely open; insects
Raw flowers edible, fry, sprinkle on salad
Leaves closest to middle are less bitter 
Salad or briase. Bitter so combine flavours. Pesto with sunflower seeds
Roots: peel and roast
All is bitter tho

Comfrey 
Blend into paste and apply
Good for compost 
Make into cream/salves

Fireweed. Spring, shoots, cook. Pink/red

Plantain. Broad or narrow, sauteed like spinach. Often with nettle and Burdick. Chew for stinging nettle scratches and mosquito bites, put as poultice on skin

Clover. Bigger leaves with purple flowers. Flowers are sweet. Leaves are tougher, so cook

Dock. Red pimple spots. Centre rib tends to be pinkish
He picks it before it unfurl as it grows, eat raw  is sour in spring. If older, cook

Cat ear 
Looks like dandelion, smaller, leaves grow flat, thicker, harrier, cook. Flowers too

Horsetail
Hollow centre with brown head is edible
Cook
Full of clean water inside the bigger hollow heads 
Also use for scrubbing clean things

Rosehips 
When petals fall off, harvest deep red, if possible a little dry, looks like tomato kind of
Not the ones with bugs!!
Split open, scoop out seeds and eat flesh, very sweet
Jams, jelly, dry and make tea (collect petals in spring or just split the berry in fall to dry)

Cattails  (reeds?) 
End of life cycle, use as fire starter, insulator in clothing
Younger, pollen, tap it out and use like flour/protein
Pollen part when wrapped in leaf still, can boil and eat like corn on yhe cob
Spring, eat shoots raw, like celery
Roots can be used as flour too


