Motor freight
Advantages: Speed, reliability, low damage, accessibility (get anywhere), flexibility
Efficient financially because roads are paid by govt/taxpayers. 
Costs: fuel (39%), wages (26%), maintenance (12%), equipment (cab and trailer 17%), user charges (insurance and fees 5%)
City trucks (smaller, no trailer), line-haul vehicles (40 and 53 ft), specialty (fridge, livestoc, tankers, automobile)
Terminals: using diff trucks, take products out to sort, and then onto diff truck. Not for storage
3 types of terminals: pick up and delivery (city truc to line-hall), cross docs (connect networks of transportation together), relay terminals (switch out the cab and put trailer on a new cab so fresh driver continues)
 
Motor carriers: ⅔ of freight in US moved by truck. Majority of these companies are small businesses.
3 basic forms of operation
truckload or TL: as shipper, rent out the whole truck, from your origin to destination directly. Many smaller carriers do this
Less than truckload or LTL: own a share of teh truck for that shipment and pay by weight. Will probably go through a network of terminals, not direct to destination. Requires national/regional network
Parcel freight: even smaller than LTL, much faster but also more expensive
Not profitable business because the major form of competition is over price, and it is easy to get into the business. 
Terminals are not too capital intensive, operating cost in US approx $1.20-$1.80 per mile
 
AIR FREIGHT
Advantages: speed, capacity, accessibility
Expensive. When speed outweighs cost, this is the way to go (ex. Emergency shipments, commodities like mail, communication products, race horses)
Hard to turn profit--tied too much to fuel, other cost mostly equipment. High variable costs
Types of planes: large all cargo planes just for freight, smaller narrow body planes, bally cargo (on commercial airplanes)
Goods go to airport by truck, on arrival they get unloaded, use drayage carriers (small motor freight carriages) for short distance, and then onto truck again
Speed advantage can be offset by flight frequency and timing, smaller communities have even less, indirect routing due to hub and spoke networks, also security delays
Weight must correspond to a certain density. If it’s bigger than the corresponding volume, you pay more.
Forms of operation
All-cargo is like TL - rent the whole plane
Commercial airlines can carry smaller quantities - like LTL
Can also use for small shipments, but very expensive
 
INTERMODAL: container on a train. Combines train and truck for efficiency (use truck for pickup and delivery, rail for long haul which is most fuel efficient)
Trains can also double stack - such an old form of transportation, but this maxes advantages and mins disadvantages
On long distances (over 500 miles) the rail is not much slower
 
Distance
Truck: up to 500 miles is ideal, but still advantages over other modes to 750 miles
Train: over 750 miles has some speed advantages, average distance is about 1700 miles
Air: at least 500 miles but usually over 2000 miles
 
WAREHOUSES
Used to consolidate raw material supplies when there is more than 1 plant and more than 1 raw material supplier
Rather than have each supplier ship to each plant, better to have a warehouse that ships out assembled assortments to each plant as needed
Advantages: Efficiency is better--inventory (can hold in one place and just what is needed), production (get resupplied when they need them); ris pooling (in one place rather than scattered), service level is higher
 
3 basic functions of warehousing
Movement: receiving, transferring, picking, shipping
Storage: want it all together readily available for customer
Information (about inventory)
Types of warehouses: private (company builds just for their products, they run it for just their business), public (multiple companies, shipping process managed by a warehousing company
 
What makes a warehouse good?
Speed: get it to customer asap
Quality: don’t send wrong item, multiple checks built into distribution system to ensure this
Productivity: reduce, reuse, recycle, efficiency
 
How to best design warehouse, considering above 3 goals (speed, quality, productivity)
Shortest distance possible for all products
Best selling products are closest to shipping dock
Fast throughput (unload product off truck, into storage areas until customer wants it. Then a worker has to take it off the shelf, put on conveyor belt, it is sorted to a location and then the whole order is assembled and packaged, staged by truc, loaded. All controlled by warehouse management system)
Types of storage: 1 case lot/fast mover, 2 bulk storage/slow mover, 3 flow racks/broken cases
 
